
These installation instructions apply to the binary distributions of
version 5 Condor.

These distributions are available in source form also, but we are not
attempting to provide instructions on how to build condor from the
source this time around.  We have found that there is a great deal of
variation of the availability and in the implementation of the tools we
use to build Condor, and we can no longer keep up with the questions
and problems that arise.  We don't want to discourage anybody from
building and modifying the code to meet their needs, it's just that if
you choose to go this route, you're on your own.

The binary distribution is packaged in the following 4 directories:

    bin		- executable programs
    lib		- libraries to link condor user programs and scripts
    doc		- postscript and ascii versions of documents
    examples	- C, Fortran, and C++ example programs

You should plan to install "bin" and "lib" under a common directory in
some well known location so that your users can find the condor
programs and libraries in a consistent place.  The doc directory can go
wherever is customary at your site.  The examples directory could also
go anywhere, but the "Makefiles" do contain relative references to the
"lib" directory.  If you move the examples directories, you will need to
change the "Makefiles" before you can build the examples.

SOLARIS SPECIFIC NOTE: Condor no longer needs to run under the root
user-id *on Solaris only*.  Instead, all daemons may be run under the
condor user-id.  We do not recommend mixing root daemons with condor
daemons.  Some documents will still refer to the need for the root
user-id.  You can ignore those parts.

1. Un-compress and un-tar the distribution.  Example: you want to install
   all the condor related stuff in "/usr/condor".
	1. mkdir /usr/condor
	2. cd /usr/condor
	3. (fetch the distribution file)
	4. uncompress condor_5.1a_DecAlpha.tar.Z
	5. tar xf condor_5.1a_DecAlpha.tar

2. One machine in your condor pool will act as a "central manager"
   for the pool.  You should decide which machine will serve that
   function, and install Condor there first.  Because of the importance
   of this machine, we recommend you pick one which is likely to be
   reliable, or at least to get rebooted promptly if it does crash.

3. Each machine in your pool will need a "condor" account, and a
   "condor" group.  Condor's UID and GID should be consistent across all
   machines in your pool.  You can easily add machines to your pool 
   at any time, but you should decide at this point where your
   condor home directories will be located.  You should install
   the "condor" account for at least your central manager machine now.

4. Several of the programs must be "setgid condor".  Go to
the condor "bin" directory and make certain that the following programs
have owner "condor", group "condor", and permission "-rwxrwsr-x":
	condor_globalq
	condor_history
	condor_jobqueue
	condor_preen
	condor_prio
	condor_q
	condor_rm
	condor_submit
	condor_summary
	condor_throttle.generic


5. If Condor's home directory will be shared across the machines in
   your pool, you will need to create a directory for each machine where
   it can keep machine specific data.  Make the directories under
   Condor's home directory, and name each directory with the hostname
   of the machine whose data it will hold.

   If Condor's home directory will not be shared across the machines in
   your pool, you don't need to do this.

6. If condor runs into a problem at your site, it will send mail describing
   what went wrong.  You need to decide who should get such mail.  You
   may want to make this an alias so that you can change the recipient
   of the mail later without changing condor.

7. Once a week Condor will try to send a status report back to its
   authors.  This function can be defeated, but if there is any
   way within reason that you can allow this at your site, we would
   really appreciate your cooperation.  This kind of information
   is really helpful to us in determining (and demonstrating) the
   effectiveness of our work.  Our internet mailing address is
	condor_admin@cs.wisc.edu
   please consider whether you can send mail to this address from your
   site, or whether you can make some modification of the address to
   get the mail delivered.  You will be asked for this information
   later.

8. Some of the scripts and configuration files in the binary distribution
   will need to be customized for your installation.  A program called
   "condor_customize" is provided for this (in the "bin" directory).
   The program will ask you 5 things, providing defaults for each.  You
   should be prepared to answer these questions before you run the
   customization program.

    a. Which host you want act as the central manager for your Condor pool.
       See step 2 above.
    b. The local email address where you want Condor to notify you
       regarding problems.  See step 5 above.
    c. The email address where condor can send a weekly status report
       back to its authors. See step 6 above.
    d. The pathname of the directory which contains the "bin" and
       "lib" directories.  See step 1 above.
    e. The pathname of the directory which contains the machine specific
       data.  See step 4 above.  Note: two macros are available to
       simplify the specification of this directory.  The $(TILDE)
       macro translates to the name of Condor's home directory on
       whatever machine it is evaluated on, and the $(HOSTNAME)
       macro evaluates to the hostname of whatever machine it is
       evaluated on.  Thus if you have separate home directories for
       all the condor accounts in your pool you could specify
	    $(TILDE)
       for this value, and if you have a shared home directory for condor
       you could specify
	   $(TILDE)/$(HOSTNAME)

9. Build subdirectories to hold the machine specific data by running
   "condor_init" on each machine you want in your pool. N.B. you must
   be "root" when you run "condor_init" (except on Solaris).


10. Start the condor daemons by running "condor_on" on each machine you
   want in your pool.  N.B. you must be "root" when you run this
   program (except on Solaris).

11. Ensure that condor is running.  You can run
	ps -e | egrep condor_
    on you central manager machine you should have processes for

	condor_master
	condor_collector
	condor_negotiator
	condor_kbdd
	condor_startd
	condor_schedd

    On all other machines in your pool you should have processes for

	condor_master
	condor_kbdd
	condor_startd
	condor_schedd

	(Suns and HP's don't run "condor_kbdd" as they dont' need it.)

12. Ensure that the condor daemons are communicating.  You can
    run "condor_status" to get a one line summary of the status
    of each machine in your pool.

13. Try building and running some test jobs.  A separate document
    describes how to link and run these jobs.
